Across the country, people are waking up to the importance to our very humanity of urban foliage – and taking on those who chop it down
A Sheffield street is lined with plane trees planted in honour of pupils from the local school who died in the first world war. When you walk along this living memorial and touch each trunk, it sparks a strange feeling of intimacy with historic events. These trees help us to remember, creating a powerful sense of continuity with past lives.

This avenue has deservedly won the Great Trees of Sheffield contest, which celebrates this uniquely green city’s trees. I’ve written before about the struggle by Sheffield residents to stop healthy trees from being felled, after the council signed a 25-year deal with Amey to maintain its roads. So Rob McBride, who tirelessly works to protect notable trees, asked me to help judge this contest alongside Sheffield luminaries such as Richard Hawley and Jarvis Cocker.
Discovering the trees nominated by local people was a joyful task. There is the Ryle Road lime, bizarrely situated in the middle of a road junction; a black mulberry, one of the largest in the country which provides shade, and bountiful fruit, for schoolchildren; a tree with a fairy door set beneath its roots; an oak in a cricket field; and another with more than 500 Twitter followers. This last oak, like 20 of those first world war trees, is earmarked for destruction. Campaigners say another 100 street trees were chopped down in the city last week but peaceful protests have, temporarily, given some a reprieve.

“A culture is no better than its woods,” wrote Auden. The fate of our urban forest shows all that is good and bad about contemporary society. In many places, short-term cost-cutting is causing its destruction, even though councils can now quantify the trees’ financial value in terms of cleaning our air and ameliorating flooding.

At least tree-fellers are now encountering a genuine grassroots awakening to the importance of urban foliage. Citizens in many communities are championing trees, including the Brockley Society, which has raised £60,000 to plant 250 new street trees in Lewisham, south-east London.

The power of nature in our culture may just be on the rise again. Ordinary trees can possess deep meanings for us. The bonds we form with them can cause us to give thanks, and make the most of our own, much shorter, lives.

The wolf in us
There have been queues in Manchester to obtain tattoos of honeybees, the symbol of the city. This demonstration of solidarity with the victims of the terror attack also reveals our solidarity with the natural world.
In times of trauma, seeking connections with other living things can provide comfort. What is more community-minded, and resilient, than a worker bee? I’ve seen many wolf tattoos recently (a pack animal like us, which also symbolises the wild). And butterflies too: these often mark a drastic transformation in a person’s life, just as a butterfly journeys from caterpillar to winged insect. Long may other animals enrich our understanding of ourselves.

The power of lost causes
I attended a talk by Tim Winton on Friday and could have listened to the Australian novelist’s self-deprecating wisdom all day. His beautiful evocation of land-and-seascapes have led him, naturally, to protect them. “If you’re an environmental activist,” he said, “your job is mostly to lose.” Victories, when they come – this spring he helped defeat pro-fracking candidates in the Western Australian elections – must be treasured.

In all kinds of battles, such as the forthcoming election, progressives will lose. But we all gain heart from simply continuing to try.

… as you’re joining us today from Romania, we have a small favour to ask. Tens of millions have placed their trust in the Guardian’s fearless journalism since we started publishing 200 years ago, turning to us in moments of crisis, uncertainty, solidarity and hope. More than 1.5 million supporters, from 180 countries, now power us financially – keeping us open to all, and fiercely independent.

Unlike many others, the Guardian has no shareholders and no billionaire owner. Just the determination and passion to deliver high-impact global reporting, always free from commercial or political influence. Reporting like this is vital for democracy, for fairness and to demand better from the powerful.

And we provide all this for free, for everyone to read. We do this because we believe in information equality. Greater numbers of people can keep track of the global events shaping our world, understand their impact on people and communities, and become inspired to take meaningful action. Millions can benefit from open access to quality, truthful news, regardless of their ability to pay for it.