Who was Tipu Sultan fighing against?
Indians,British -c,Muslims
What was Xavier de Maistre book about? 
Traveling to Rome and Paris,Traveling about his own room -c,Traveling from Switzerland to the border of Pakistan and Afghanistan
How is the 1946-1964 - "Baby boomer" generation called? 
The "Silent Generation",The "Greatest Generation",The "Me Generation" -c
What did Sprite substitute sugar with?
Stevia -c,Honey,Fruits
How did the Sheffield city's community share support for victims of war? 
By planting trees -c,By getting tattoos,By raising funds
What is the most basic idea for a habit tracker? 
Get a calendar, chose a few habits and cross off each day you stick with your routine -c,Write down a list of at least ten habits you wish to track,Chose a powerful design for your Habit Journal
Which is the actual hidden purpose of IPL? 
Movie industry,Fashion industry,Betting industry -c
Where does the violent episode take place?
Islamabad-Pakistan,Budgam-Kashmir -c,Kathmandu-Nepal.
Who did Trump try to dismiss? (Hence being accused of obstruction of justice)
H.R. McMaster National - Security Counselor,Archibald Cox - Special Counselor,James Comey - FBI Director -c
The biggest part of all the chocolate in the world comes from:
Brazil,West Africa -c,India
How can hunted objects sold on E-bay be verified?
By asking for a guarantee,Through a medium,By pressing the buy button -c
Who was George T. Nagel?
SUA President,Nobel Prize winner,Yabloner Rebbe - the founder of a small village called Kfar Hasidim next to Haifa -c
In what year did E.A.Poe write Eureka - a prose poem?
1809,1848 -c,1875
In the Everest movie, who played Beck Weathers - the alpinist that managed to come down after he was left dying?
Tom Cruise -c,Brad Pitt,Josh Brolin
Who wrote the paper "Ledgers of History"?
Sally Wolff-King -c,Jack Elliott,Marcus Gray
What choice does S.W. make when experiencing VR?
Lamborghini race,Sitting on a flying plane's wing,Africa -c
What is one of the principal polarities in life?
The good and bad,The male and femal side of human nature -c,The two sides of a coin
According to previous decades' experiments, to the aroma of bananas, humans are as sensiive as: 
Cats,Dogs and mice -c,Horses
What is the main topic of the chapter?
Definition of virtue,Exploting virtue for personal gain -c,Gaining knowledge about virtue
What is one thing that makes car companies economically powerful?
They outsource virtually everything -c,They have new concepts,They have new technology
How does the author call the new generation?
The best generation,The generation of “we can do it better” -c,The generation of everything
What was the main factor that led europeans to navigate in the 1400's? 
The need for spices -c,Religion,Wars
What did the Doodler's victims have in common? 
Neither of them was married,They were all celebrities,They were all gay people -c
The buildings in Philadelphia that Urban Outfitters Inc. converted into stores, were intially used as: 
America's naval shipyard -c,Clothing factory,Jewellery factory
What is Greyhound? 
A train station,A bus company -c,A passenger Alice Adams meets on her way to work