Imagine yourself sitting in a café one day in your home town, when on the next table you hear some people speaking English with a strong North American accent. Being a friendly person, you lean over and say, "Hi! Are you American?"
"No," comes the immediate answer. "Canadian!"
Calling a English-speaking Canadian an American can be as bad as telling a Scotsman that he's English or a Swiss person he's German. In spite of a common language, there are differences in culture and national feeling. "No," many Canadians will tell you with insistence, "We're not Americans! We're Canadians."
In the same way as Quebecers are determined to keep their identity, Canadians from the other provinces are determined to keep Canada's identity. Although the Canadian way of life is more and more like the American way of life, lots of details are different, and many Canadians, particularly Quebecers, are worried about the survival of their own differences.
Canadians use metres and kilometres and measure temperatures in Celsius; Americans use feet and miles, and measure temperature in Fahrenheit. The USA has states, Canada has provinces.
Yet about 80% of Canadians live within 150 km. of the U.S. border, and this has had a bad effect on the Canadian economy. Like most European countries, Canada has a national health service, and a good social security system; but good welfare services have to be paid for by high taxes, so the cost of living in Canada is high. Because of this, hundreds of thousands of Canadians often get in their cars and drive over to the USA to go shopping. This is one cause of economic problems in Canada. Over half of Canada's imports come from the United States, and Canada has a trade deficit with the USA.
But the American influence is not just a question of shopping. Lots of Canadians drive American cars, and cars are almost as important in Canada as they are in the USA. There is television too. While Quebecers tend to watch their own French-language TV stations, English-speaking Canadians have a choice between local English-speaking channels, national programmes from CBC, and dozens of American channels brought to them by cable or satellite. Unless they specifically want to watch local stations, they're just as likely to tune in to one of the big American channels as they are to a Canadian channel.
Perhaps it is not surprising if some Canadians are afraid that their country will soon be just like another part of the USA. If, one day, Quebec becomes independent, many Canadians fear that the rest of Canada could break up. Perhaps that's an exaggeration; many Canadians feel it is a real risk.
//////////////////////////
If you go to a restaurant in Spain, and eat a paella with lots of sea-food in it, think of Scotland. If you go to a restaurant in France and eat salmon, think of Scotland. In the last forty years, the Highlands of Scotland have found an important new industry: fish-farming. And today, Scottish lobsters, shrimps, (crustaceans) and fish are exported all over the world. Around Fort William, there are several fish-farms. These are places where salmon and trout (in particular) are bred and raised in special cages. Some of these are in salt-water lochs, others in fresh-water lochs. Other related industries have followed, creating opportunities for young people to find work. However, in and around Fort William, the principal industries are paper, aluminium, and tourism. All of them are relatively recent.
Traditional industries such as farming, sea fishing, and weaving, cannot provide many interesting opportunities for young people who want a good job. The situation, nevertheless, is not a bad one, compared to some other parts of Britain. The population is small, and the industries that do exist are not dying ones. There is less unemployment in the Highlands than in many parts of Britain. There are openings for young people who want to follow a Youth Training programme after they leave school; and there are various types of help for young people who want to create their own jobs. Of course, there are limited opportunities for some types of job; but on the whole, there are plenty of advantages to counteract the disadvantages. Today's young Highlanders are not all wanting to leave.
//////////////////////////
Whisky is probably the most famous product of Scotland. Whisky distilling provides work for several thousand people in the Scottish Highlands and islands, and whisky is Scotland's biggest export...
The qualities of whisky come from the water which is used to make it — the rich "peaty" water of Scotland. When whisky is first made, it is actually transparent, not brown in colour. The colour comes from the wooden barrels in which the whisky is stored for several years, to allow it to mature, and from a little added caramel.
For many years, whisky has been a very popular drink all over the world, and Scotland has produced more and more of it ; but whisky sales have not increased as fast, so there are now large reserves of whisky in Scotland, specially the good and more expensive whiskies.. Thus a lot of the whisky sold today was made several years ago, when people imagined that whisky would get more and more popular. That is why, today, a lot of the whisky in the shops is labelled "Ten years old", or even  "Fifteen years old".
//////////////////////////
City life is cool; but is country life cooler?
Apparently yes.
After the terrible Covid-19 epidemic of 2020, lots of people would like to leave their city and live in the country.
More and more people in Britain want to live in the country, and this is causing more and more problems in some rural areas.
The population of British cities has been falling for years. Cities like Liverpool and Glasgow have lost about 30% of their population in 30 years. But Britain's population is still growing. Where are the people going?
Answer: to the country.
The English countryside has a classic image. People imagine that life in the country is slow and calm; that there are no traffic jams,  no pollution, and no crime. In some places, this is true; but in others it is not.
Small towns and villages are becoming more and more popular; people have more space and most houses have gardens. But problems are growing. Lots of people want to live in the country and work in the city; so more and more people travel long distances each day, to go to work. Of course they don't use buses (they are too slow) or trains (they don't stop in the country); they use cars. And although they live in the country, they want to use supermarkets and good fast roads.... but they do not want to see them or hear them. Besides, lots of young people say that life in the country is boring: there is not enough to do, there are not enough activities and excitements.
Little villages now have traffic problems in the morning, just like big cities! And they are getting worse.
The problems are very complicated! If everyone moves into the country, large parts of the countryside will disappear! People leave cities and big towns, to escape from urban problems; but more and more, they are bringing their problems with them.
On warm summer days, and cold winter days, air pollution can be a big problem in large parts of the south of England, not just in London. Traffic jams are now often part of life, even in the country; crime has become a serious problem in rural areas.
Perhaps there is hope for the future. Soon Britain's population will stop rising. From about the year 2030, it will perhaps start to fall. In 100 year's time, there will be less people in Britain than today - perhaps two million less. No doubt there will be less pollution too; oil and petrol will probably be rare by then.
//////////////////////////
In November 2021, Disney screens a new documentary about the Beatles, called Get Back. The three-part documentary is about the Beatles' final album, Let It Be, made in 1970
In 2019, the Beatles' Abbey Road was (again) the top-selling vinyl album in the USA, with 246,000 sales.
In 2014, Hollywood made a big new documentary film about the Beatles.... almost 50 years after they broke up !
In 2013, a "new" Beatles album, "On air live at the BBC - part 2" was the group's 31st top ten album in the USA !
In 1996, six million Beatles albums were sold during the year. That would be a good score for a functioning band or group; but for a group that last played together in 1969, it was incredible!
In Britain, a study recently showed that the Beatles are still one of the most popular groups with people over 15 years old; and they are still popular with teenagers too.
All over the world, teenagers know the tunes, and often some of the words too, of the Beatles' most famous songs. Yesterday, Penny Lane, Hey Jude and When I am Sixty Four are among the best known.
Among more recent pop groups, many big names  - such as Oasis, Blur or Foo Fighters - owe a lot to the Beatles, and they say so! In their album the Masterplan, Oasis did a new version of the Beatles' song I am the Walrus.
However there are also dozens of bands all over the world which do nothing but copy the Beatles. There is a band in England called the Bootleg Beatles, a band in America called the Fab Four, a Norwegian band called Det Betales, and even a band called Museum in Kazakhstan; and there are many more too!
The Bootleg Beatles now do over 100 shows a year, and they always bring in big audiences! Once, they filled the 10,000 seat Budokan stadium in Japan!
There are also dozens of Beatles conventions and Beatles weekends every year, in different parts of the world. The annual BeatleFest in America (founded in 1974) takes place twice each year, and attracts up to 20,000 fans!
In Britain, the Beatles are still a big tourist attraction. Thousands of people go to Liverpool every year, to see where it all began. In Liverpool, they can visit the Beatles' museum, take a "Beatles' Tour" of the city (seeing places like Penny Lane), or visit the house where Paul MacCartney lived as a teenager.
So why did the Beatles become so popular in the sixties, and why are they still so popular today?
They became popular because they caught the spirit of a generation. Sixties teenagers were very different from fifties teenagers; they wanted to change things, and escape from the rather dull fifties. The Beatles came along, offering a new type of music, with new instruments (electric guitars). They were not the only group, of course; but they were the best, the most original. At first they copied rock 'n' roll songs from America. These were not well-known in England at the time, but it was easy to get rock 'n' roll records in Liverpool, a busy port city at the time. Sailors brought the most popular records from America, and these became popular with young musicians in Liverpool. Then the Beatles began writing their own songs - and people liked them.
When they became popular, they did not stop doing new things; instead, they pushed back the frontiers of pop/rock music in all directions. And where they went, others followed.
Today people are still following them; and probably they will continue following for a long time to come.